# Lecture 7: Performance

## 17.2 Addressing and Forwarding

    Clearly, to send packets to some end point, we need a way to uniquely identify the end point. Such identifiers are examples of names, a concept commonly used in computer systems: names provide a handle that can be used to refer to various objects. In our context, we want to name end points and switches. We will use the term address to refer to the name of a switch or an end point. For our purposes, the only requirement is that addresses refer to end points and switches uniquely. In large networks, we will want to constrain how addresses are assigned, and distinguish between the unique identifier of a node and its addresses. The distinction will allow us to use an address to refer to each distinct network link (aka “interface”) available on a node; because a node may have multiple links connected to it, the unique name for a node is distinct from the addresses of its interfaces (if you have a computer with multiple active network interfaces, say a wireless link and an
Ethernet, then that computer will have multiple addresses, one for each active interface).

    In a packet-switched network, each packet sent by a sender contains the address of the destination. It also usually contains the address of the sender, which allows applications and other protocols running at the destination to send packets back. All this information is in the packet’s header, which also may include some other useful fields. When a switch gets a packet, it consults a table keyed by the destination address to determine which link to send the packet on in order to reach the destination. This process is a table lookup, and the table in question is called the routing. The combination of the destination address and outgoing link is called the route used by the switch for the destination. Note that the route is different from the path between source and destination in the topology; the sequence of routes at individual switches produces a sequence of links, which in turn leads to a path (assuming that the routing and forwarding procedures are working correctly).